Pro-Russian protesters forced police out of a building in an eastern Ukrainian city on Monday, even as a government deadline for demonstrators to leave occupied facilities passed with no immediate consequences in two other cities. Video from a demonstration in the eastern Ukrainian city of Horlivka showed protesters confronting police and walking through the building, which had small fires burning and broken windows. A severely beaten man in a police uniform was taken to an ambulance as onlookers shouted at him. The seizure is a new complication for the government in Kiev.

Acting President Oleksandr Turchynov had given pro-Russian protesters in other eastern Ukrainian cities until 2 a.m. ET to disarm or face a "full-scale anti-terrorist operation" by Ukraine's armed forces. But the deadline passed with no sign that it was heeded in the eastern cities of Donetsk and Slaviansk. There was no movement at the regional government building in Donetsk, which has been occupied for more than a week. In Slaviansk, pro-Russian protesters milled around with makeshift shields outside the occupied police station.  Pro-Russian gunmen seize building NATO: Pics show Russian military buildup Russian separatists in Donetsk dig in Ukrainian citizens carry cost of conflict Similar deadlines in the past came and went with no consequence. Horlivka, with a population of about 300,000, became at least the 10th city or town in Russian-speaking eastern Ukraine -- mainly in the Donetsk region -- where activists took over security or government buildings in recent days.

Turchynov had issued a promise of amnesty for the activists -- including protesters as well as armed militants who in recent days have stormed public buildings and planted Russian flags on them -- in eastern Ukraine but warned that anyone who continued to support the takeover of government buildings would be held responsible for their actions. After the deadline passed Monday, Turchynov said the majority of Ukrainians would back keeping Ukraine in one piece if a referendum is held along with presidential elections set for May 25.

In Moscow, Russian Foreign Minister Sergey Lavrov said any use of force against pro-Russian demonstrators in Ukraine is counter to creating a lasting solution to the crisis.
A stable Ukraine is in Moscow's best interest, Lavrov said, also denying reports that Russian forces are active in the east. He refused to speculate about what events or actions would spur a military intervention by Russia into Ukraine.

Lavrov said he would hold off judgment on Turchynov's proposed referendum until Moscow sees the outline of the questions to be asked. He added that pro-Russian activists in the east must be given an active role in shaping a new constitution. Ukrainian officials have placed blame for unrest in the eastern section of their country squarely on Russia. The new Ukrainian government said the security operations were launched against terrorists who are attempting to "destroy our country."

Giving no further details, it also said it had "concrete evidence of Russian special service involvement" in the pro-Russian protests and storming of buildings and would present it at an international meeting on the Ukraine crisis on Thursday.

Ukrainian security forces launched an operation Sunday to clear pro-Russian separatists from the police headquarters in Slaviansk, officials said.Gunmen dressed in camouflage had stormed and seized the police building a day earlier in Slaviansk, a town about 100 miles from the Russian border, and set up barricades around it.